How does language matter in the workplace? In particular, how do workplaces handle immigrants with low language skills? 

Sweden has had a large amount of immigration since the 90's. These immigrants often have poor reading and writing skills even in their own language, have little educational background, and overall have a low amount of human capital. Increasingly, these immmigrants come from countries and languages that are very distant from Swedish in linguistic terms (Arabic, Somali, Tigrinya, Dari). 

At the same time, the Swedish labour market has extremely high entrance level wages. In what is called the "Swedish Model" (or at least called that in Sweden), the trade unions and business unions collectively decide on wages, without political interference. This means that it's pretty hard to get in, but once you're in, you've great benefits. Immigrants without languague skills, then, get locked out. It's no wonder that unemployment rate for people born in sub-saharan Africe is 28 percent. For people born in Sweden, it's about 5 percent, and for people born outside Swede, 15 percent. 

So we've clearly got a massive issue. Language skills play a pivotal role. Language skills matter more and more, since people don't stand at assembly lines all day anymore. Instead, you have to be able to handle teambuilding meetings and planning meetings and monday meetings. Lots of talking, anyways. That's even the case in what's called simple jobs, like elderly care. Sure, you're only really making household chores, but you have to be able to talk to the elderly man to find out what's needed. 

The issue is becoming even more politically salient given that the government just published an "state inquiry" (an inquiry into the feasability and consequencs of legislation that precedes big legal changes) into language demands in elderly care and proposed a law where one would have to reach a certain level of swedish before working in elderly care (SOU 2024:78). 

This project at the [Ratio institute](www.ratio.se/en), an interdisciplinary research institute focused on business and entreprise, looks at how language skills play a role in the workplace. Most of the research done has been qualitative, ethnographic work, and there's a definite lack of quantitative research. One important survey study looked at the views of employers. What did they think was needed in terms of language? Simply put: they thought it was important, but did not know how to evaluate it. Perhaps most worrying is that they did not trust the municipal "swedish for immigrants" educational program (Eriksson & Rooth, 2022). We want to build on this research and look at the other side of the equation: what do coworkers think about language skills in the workplace? We're particularly interested in low-skills workplaces that are typically the first job of an immigrant - cleaning companies, warehouses, taxis, bus drivers. How do they handle language barriers, and what strategies are employed to get around these barriers? Are assignments differentiated based on language skill?

I've worked in the initial stages of the project: identifying a research question through looking at gaps in the literature, collecting data and background information, and most importantly, creating this email scraper. The email scraper is meant to scrape emails from different company websites so that we can send out our survey to the maximum amount of people. We get the emails through a different google maps scraper. This was my first scraper that I've ever created, so I've kept it quite simple and boilerplate. I'm sure it could be massively improved, in particular in terms of speed. That is probably the largest area of improvement. 

Once the report is out (if it does finally get published) I will paste it here.

